Big messages from each talk

* Bert Vogelstein (keynote)
Deaths from cardiovascular disease over the last 60 years have
decreased about 70%, while deaths from cancer have stayed
stagnant. Why? Vogelstein suggests this is because most funding for
cancer research has focused on curing advanced cancers, but the most
promise for impact comes from *prevention* and *early detection*.

* Lynda Chin
We are generating overwhelmingly large cancer genomics datasets: whole genome
sequencing, transcriptomics, proteomics, and scores of epigenetic
marks. We need to make better visualization and data resources to
crowdsource analyses of these data to maximize its utility.

* Jason Hoskins
Hoskins tackles the important task of following up a GWAS hit for predisposition to pancreatic
cancer all the way to the causal variant and mechanism. He finds a
double insertion event tagged by the GWAS hit that forms a novel
binding site for LEF1 that silences DIS3 through long range interaction.

* Brad Bernstein
Berstein uses high throughput and single cell genomics to find the
factors driving stemness in glioblastomas.

* Martin Tobin
Lung function and COPD are highly heritable conditions, and
associations found by GWAS explain only a small portion of the genetic
variance. By smartly stratifying cohorts (here non-smokers
vs. smokers) we can gain better insight into variants contributing to
the disease.

* Peter Gregersen
"Phenotype. phenotype. phenotype." Focusing on rheumatoid arthritis, Gregersen emphasizes that often
disease phenotypes can be very heterogenous. We can increase our power
and effect sizes by looking at more homogenous phenotypes, such as
molecule "endophenotypes" underlying the disease.

* Judy Cho
Cho also emphasizes, this time in IBD, that a key to GWAS success is
identifying the correct molecular endophenotype. She identifies links
between IBD and mycobacterial susceptibility.

* Eric Green (keynote)
Eric Green expresses optimism about the future of genomic medicine,
and gives his 6 hottest areas upcoming areas of importance: (1) cancer
genomics, (2) pharmacogenomics, (3) genomic medicine "test drive"
programs, (4) prenatal and newborn genomic analysis, (5) clinical
genomics information systems, and (6) ultra-rare disease genomics.

* Matthew Maurano
Deep sequencing of DNaseI hypersensitivity sites and other molecular
phenotypes elucidates widespread allelic imbalance and shows cell type
specific differences in the genome's regulatory architecture.

* Nancy Cox
In order for us to accurately translate a variant into patient care,
we will need to integrate data from a large number of sources, which
by themselves have no clinical utility. Cox also presents a clever
approach of using genotypes to predict gene expression, then
associated expression levels directly with disease phenotypes to gain
insight into key genes related to disease.

* Simona Volpi
The GTEx project is generating large datasets of genotype and
expression data across many individuals in an large range of tissue
types that will serve as a valuable resource for interpreting the
effect of genetic variants.

* Jeroen Huyghe
Integrating GWAS hits with functional data will be a key to
interpretation. GWAS SNPs from Type 2 Diabetes alter expression in
relevant tissues of liver, pancreas, and skeletal muscle.

* Howard Jacob
"The future of common disease: phenotype with your apple watch, plus
sequencing in the clinic". Jacob claims the future of clinical
sequencing lies in whole genome, rather than whole exome sequencing,
which should capture a larger range of relevant variation.

* Hreinn Stefannson (deCODE)
Most association studies study the effect of a variant on individuals
*with a certain phenotype*. However, this does not allow us to answer
the question of penetrance. Here deCODE looks at how CNVs implicated in
schizophrenia and autism behave in normal control samples. They find
that these CNVs significantly affect cognitive function in controls,
separate from the manifest disease.

* David Goldstein
*De novo* mutations are in clear excess in patients arriving at the
genetics clinic. To evaluate the significance of these, it is
important to have an accurate null model of *de novo* mutation.

* Leslie Biesecker
A key objection to using sequencing results in the clinic is that the
penetrance of most variants is unknown. Currently, reported variants
suffer from a high false positive rate. Biesecker claims that we have
been underestimating the prior probability of disease, and that by
more accurately estimating this we may be able to boost the positive
predictive value of mutations returned by these tests.

* David Hinds (23andMe)
23andMe have collected a large genetic dataset from a diverse set of
Americans. Through online surveys, they achieve striking GWAS results
for such traits as "do you cry easily" and "are you a morning person".

* Yaniv Erlich
Using an awesome analysis of a 43 million person pedigree obtained
using social media, Erlich showed that the overwhelmingly best model
for the genetic architecture of longevity is an additive
model.

* Vinneta Agarwala
Are "synthetic associations", or rare variants on common haplotypes,
driving GWAS signals? Agarwala finds no evidence of this at the 9p21 locus implicated
in Type 2 Diabetes, suggesting the signal is due primarily to common
variants.

* Hilary Finucane
Using a novel statistical genetics metric, the LD score, we can more
accurately measure the heritability of polygenic traits, and can partition


My big areas:
- huge datasets, infrastructure will be huge (Chin, Altshuler,
Manolio, big projects like GTEx, 1000G)
- need to better integrate data to interpret GWAS hits. think clever
computational methods to do this will be key (Hoskins,
Dongwon's poster on DNAse, Cox)
- better phentoyping (Tobin, Gregerson, Cho)
- issue of penetrance. rarely see fully penetrant variant in complex
disease. crucial to also look at individuals *without*
the phenotype which have that variant.  (deCODE talk is key, Altshuler global alliance)


Orli's big questions:

1. 
